And we're rolling, and we're talking to Bill Holman in Austin, Texas.
Now, it's on, so if you ever want me to shut it off, tell me, okay?
But otherwise, it's on, unless otherwise indicated.
So, you know, let's explain how you and I get to know each other, and it's a telephone friendship right now, and I sure hope at some point we can meet face-to-face and shake hands.
Yeah.
You know, I'm working on a chapter for a new book that will include some attention to the San Francisco Public Library.
And you worked there for a number of years.
You took over the job in the 60s, right?
In 1960, I stayed in 67.
So that was, and I'm looking at one of the San Francisco Chronicle stories that you sent me.
They credited you with bringing, you know, this library into the 20th century, combining technological know-how, astute political maneuvering.
etc., etc., delivery.
So did you, you know, is that, did you, was that one of your goals to bring the library into the, let's open this with a very general, we'll enter the conversation.
How's that?
That's fine.
Nick, I think my major objective was reorganizing the library because it was an entire situation at that time in terms of staff, personnel, book collections.
and the technical control over its book collection.
The thing is the library has to have bibliographical control over its collections, or otherwise you'd come in and check the catalog, and you'd put a slip-in for a book, and usually six times out of ten the book wouldn't be there, and it wouldn't be checked out.
They couldn't find it.
And so that was one of the things, was trying to get the cataloging system in control.
The second thing was hiring professional staff.
And up until that time, there was a rather uneven pattern of retaining personnel.
San Francisco is a very interesting city, and the library had gone through years of
restless involvement with political overhangings that didn't nourish it for its good.
And so I think that was a major thing is to actually someone had to come in and actually take over the library and administer it and control it without political influence.
Okay.
I'm just reading here.
I noticed that you worked for Harry Ransom?
Yes, I worked for Harry.
I came here
to the Humanities Research Center.
I was at the Humanities Research Center Library later.
Did you see my book, A Gentle Madness?
Yes.
Did you see the chapter I wrote on the HRC?
Yes, yeah.
That's one of the great libraries of contemporary literature, you know.
Yeah.
And Harry was a very unique person.
He was a man that had a vision of 100 years in advance.
And also he had the astuteness to act on his vision, and he had the courage to act on his vision.
So many administrators in large university systems can have the vision, but many of them don't have the courage to act because of fear of political happenings that would come from the office.
Now, it's pretty interesting here.
I'm reading this piece in the Chronicle.
They loved you out there.
I mean, you got along.
It seems that they were sick about your leaving, and you got along well.
What a stark contrast between your experience and the one with Kenneth Dowling.
Well, I think, you know, I have a theory, and Harry Ransom and I discussed this, about ministrators.
I think ministrators, they have a butterfly gift.
life.
They come out of the cocoon.
And they, a good administrator knows when to turn over every, normally I think your positive influence as administrator is in the first three years.
Then the next three years you try to consolidate your gains and smooth out and smooth your administrative step.
At the end of five to eight years, I think your administrative
is rather negated and you shouldn't have gone.
I believe this sincerely.
And I think that, for example, I love to go in and reorganize the library.
After it got to a certain level, I would rather become not bored, but I wouldn't become as assertive and as effective as I was during the first three to five years.
And this is the main thing that happened.
I was director of the San Antonio Public Library before San Francisco.
And then I'd been director of the Rosenberg Library in Galveston, which is one of the fine, small libraries in the United States.
At one time, it was the finest library in Texas.
Really?
Now what made it one of the finest?
Well, Rosenberg endowed that library early on.
It was a larger library.
Galveston was the real cultural center of Texas for years.
and was finally overtaken by Houston and Dallas.
But up in that time, he endowed that library.
I'd say it's the finest, unique administrative organization I've ever worked in.
It was a board that controlled the library that was independent of the county and the city.
And I remember when I was interviewed, I asked Bill Morgan, I said, well, you know, I report to the board, and I said, to whom do you report?
And Bill Morgan said, we report to God.
And we're the final act around here.
That's funny.
It is a great library to work for.
Absolutely incredible.
You wouldn't believe it.
Galveston, many of the men there were graduates from universities like Virginia.
It had the very, very smooth, aristocratic type of old southern men there.
Many people wouldn't recognize that, but it's true.
Who was Rosenberg?
Rosenberg was a banker there and a large investor, and he left the Rosenberg Library as an endowment.
A large orphanage was there in his name, and he was a very influential person in the history of early Galveston.
But it's interesting that he cared about a public library, isn't it?
Yes.
And it's a beautiful building.
Oh, gorgeous.
And how are the collections?
Oh, great.
Fantastic collections.
In Texas at one time, it was the finest collection in it.
And the history of the Southwest is probably the finest.
I know I gave a collection there on small voyages.
I've always been interested in sailing.
And I've sailed out to Bermuda and sailed in the Bahamas around eight years.
My wife lived down in Bahamas and had her own boat.
So you've had a lot of experience with public libraries.
Well, I've had that.
I was one of those fortunate, Nick, that when I graduated, the opportunities were so available.
And I'd gone into pre-law at the University of Oklahoma, but when I took a course in bibliography,
My teacher encouraged me to go into library science and she said that law was not the profession I should go in.
She said there's a Lawyer Forever telephone post in Oklahomaville.
That's funny.
She was a very distinguished teacher.
You know, a lot of my attention in this new book is about this whole concept of book culture.
and the role the public library plays in this equation.
The library, in my mind, is one of the few institutions that hasn't abdicated its mission.
It has not.
No, it has not.
Even though it's changed dramatically.
It's changed dramatically, but it still has that mission that's the very center and core of the thrust of its being.
But when you...
How do I phrase this?
Do you see the public library serving a function as a research institution?
Well, in a metropolitan area, I do.
I think this is the difference of my view and other later administrations' view in San Francisco.
Exactly.
So you see where I'm going.
It's a very large metropolitan center.
of very eclectic tastes and innards.
Eclectic?
Yes.
Yeah.
And, for example, my theory is to buy collections like Harry.
If you're a library and you're weak in a certain area and you find a collection, let's say, like I did in San Francisco on mountain climbing,
You buy it.
You buy everything is.
There may be three duplicates out of 100 books, but so what?
All right, so you would buy this, and you did buy such a collection?
Yes.
And how many volumes that were there in that collection?
Oh, I imagine, you know, here I, Nick, I'm going by them.
I know, but just approximately.
I'd say there was 100 volumes.
And would it concern you, if nobody read one of those books for three or four or five years?
That's fine.
That's okay with you?
That's fine with me.
And if they didn't, would you, if one of your staff came forward and said, Mr. Holman...
Nobody's using these books, and we don't know if anyone's going to use them in the next 10 years.
We think that because we have such tight space, maybe we should deaccession these books.
What would your reaction be?
Well, I would say then come forth with me a critical evaluation of this collection of 100 books.
The authorities on mountaineering, which of the 50 would you keep?
Or which of the 75 would you keep?
What if they said none?
Well, then, if they're all really terrible books,
I would probably eradicate them.
Well, I'm not even saying that they're terrible.
Maybe they're wonderful, but nobody's using them.
That seems to be one of the criteria that people are applying here these days.
Nick, I see that's been applied for years.
It's nothing new.
When I'm in library school, they said, well, you discard all these books, you'll have them on microfilm.
Well, good luck.
You read the microfilm copies.
And I don't think they do put all these books on microfilm anyway.
That's a myth.
In these metropolitan areas, that this is what they say, they never use them, is not true.
That there's always these people out here, just like I was just avidly interested in sailing.
Absolutely.
Offshore sailing, that was my release, to get on a boat and sail out of San Francisco, sail down to L.A.,
That, to me, rejuvenated my life for a year.
I used to go to the Bahamas.
I used to fly from San Francisco to Fort Lauderdale and go to the Riverbend Marina and say, maybe you had a boat down there you just bought.
We're fixing it up, and I'd talk to you and ask if you wanted a crew, and you and I'd sail the bomb.
Sounds like fun to me.
For two weeks, and then I'd fly home and go to work.
That's great.
My wife understood that I needed those breaks because I work very intensely when I am work.
But I do, I'm like a computer.
I kind of get overloaded, and I have to run.
And my answer to life is when you get overloaded, what do you do?
Run.
And then what do you do later?
I used to have guilt complex about this.
But Dr. Gordy said, well, Bill, what do you do after you're gone three to four or six weeks?
I said, well, I come back and go to work.
He said, that's what you should do.
Now, were you mindfully building collections in San Francisco?
Yes.
You look in that book.
I have it over here on the shelf.
Just a minute.
And I've got the book, too, so don't...
If you look on page 172 to 173, the Grabhorn collection, we built that.
I joined with a friend of the library and they pledged 5,000.
And then what I did to buy that collection.
See, all the librarians have excuses not to buy a collection.
But here in one fell swoop you came up to be the major holdings of books and typography and printing and find bookmaking in the United States.
when we bought the Grabhorn collection.
And the way I bought that, you might say it could be illegal that I broke the books down and bought them on purchase orders just out of the regular book budget.
And then the friends matched that amount and that way we acquired the collection.
And why did you feel this collection was so necessary, so important?
San Francisco has been the center of fine bookmaking in America.
It is really the threshold
of the most innovative and creative work done in printing, following the Grabhorns by Malette Dean, and you should see some of his books.
And all the range of fine press and creative work in printing and imaginative work in printing has emanated from San Francisco.
And there is where the culture...
of fine typography, hand-set books, books printed on hand-made paper, later reproduced.
Adrian Wilson's printing for the theater was done there.
He was influenced by what?
He was influenced by the Grabhorns.
And so it's their derivative.
It's like writers are derivatives from other writers.
And the same is true as printing.
Then also calligraphy, the Harrison collection, we...
I talked Michael, Richard Harrison, into giving his collection and then we would, if he would add a book, then we would match that book.
And then Eric Hoffer, have you read his book?
Oh, very important, yeah.
Okay, Eric Hoffer is a friend of mine and I talked him into leaving his manuscript collection to the San Francisco Public Library because he learned much of his work there in the San Francisco Public Library
And he was a longshoreman there.
And he read at the library sometimes at least three days a week.
No kidding.
And from that library came this mine to set down The True Believer, which is an important small book, I think, in the literature.
What's the title of it once again, Bill?
The True Believer.
It's a very important book, Nick, on the understanding of what makes these people
Follow this man on the white horse out into oblivion that would scar and cancer the world with a war.
And it's a very small book.
It's written with very lucid text.
And it's an important piece.
And you say that book came from basically from his work in Los San Francisco.
You know, I'm writing a chapter on this, on readers and libraries.
I'm seeing Alfred Kazin in New York on Thursday.
Yeah.
And, you know, it's of great interest to me.
Shaw, Wolf from the British Library, Karl Marx.
Karl Marx in the British Library.
You know, all these people.
Also Nikola Tesla, an alternating current, he came up with the idea when he was reading a book.
Nikola Tesla?
You know, the Italian physicist?
Came up with?
He came up with the idea of...
alternating current when he was reading a book.
How do you know this?
I read it and I had notes on it for years.
I read about that.
I was going to write an article on books and influence that were direct.
Boy, I'd love to see your notes on that.
Nikola Tesla, T-E-S-L-A.
And, you know, I wrote those back in the 50s.
Now, Lord knows where they are now.
Can you remember offhand any other examples?
He was one of the most unique ones.
Because I was always, as a boy, I was always interested in winding my own armatures and building motors.
And so he was kind of impressed on my mind.
But I think a library is like an individual.
To have a personality, if you're a bird with a single note, you don't have
much range or influence within your own bird world, so to speak.
And the library, I think, has to have this wide range of tastes and interests.
Now, I do believe that the branches should handle the popular books.
In our interest there, we would lease the books and we'd rent them, so to speak, and have them in ample numbers for the public.
But in the central library, we still have this reserve.
Now, Nick, there is a possibility, let's say, in the next 20 years, that we'll get these CD-ROMs down whereby we can take, let's say, Book A that isn't read but once a year now, or once every five years, and put it on a CD-ROM, and then you can call for it on this mass of CD-ROMs, and I can pull it out and reprint the book for you within, you know, 20 minutes.
Now, I think that's a possibility.
And it's not remote.
It is a possibility if you can get the technology around where it's cheap enough to do it.
But at the present time, it's still not inexpensive enough to do it, first to get it on the CD-ROM, and then also to sell them or distribute them all to most of the major libraries.
It's not possible.
Very, very interesting.
Now, when we chatted one of the last time before, you don't mind jumping around here on the conversation.
Excuse me, my allergies are kicking in today.
You said when you walked in for the first time to the new San Francisco Public Library,
You said something, and I don't want to paraphrase, but you were concerned that, oh, my God, what have they done here?
You were concerned that maybe this wasn't going to work.
I don't know if I'm recollecting this, but maybe you could just tell me in your own words what happened.
I went to the old library first.
The Old Main.
This is on a recent trip to San Francisco.
This was, what, two years ago?
Okay, so 95.
Yeah, I think so, and I walked into the Old Main, and I walked upstairs to the Literature and Philosophy Literature Department, and I was aghast.
They had closed the department, shut it down, and put the staff over in the general reference collection.
And this was very disconcerting to me because here you are a metropolitan library system now, and one of the great cores of literature fall in literature and philosophy and religion.
And say, for example, if you... I still believe that you have to have well-trained, well-read, articulate, and very able people at every desk.
And say, for example, you walk in, as I did,
And I asked, and I just went over as a test case.
And I said, well... And nobody knew who you were, by the way, right?
Nobody knew who I was.
I walked over there and I said, I'm writing an autobiography and a memoir, and can you give me references to, say, four to six important books on contemporary writing and memoirs in the English language?
Mm-hmm.
God, it's dead silence.
You know?
Now, anyone in the literature, philosophy, and religion department that's trained and well-read would know that, say, like Russell Baker's growing up, his great classic in American letters, or Conroy's Stop Time, or I don't know if you've ever read T.S.
Pritchett's Cab at the Door.
He's one of the great... He's wonderful.
Short stories and essays.
Oh, yeah.
His Cab at the Door is a classic book on a memoir.
Also, Laurie Lee's Edge of Day and Nabokov, Ray Bradbury's Dandelion Wine.
Those are probably five or six of the better works in English letters of memoirs.
Now, it's not going to be in the computer.
Now, you can find in the computer Ray Bradbury's Dandelion Wine, but you need someone to synthesize all of that for you and bring it up and say, look, here's a book that you've overlooked.
Have you read this?
Have you read that?
So that's what you need there at that desk.
You need that specialist librarian with that special collection.
Now, if you put me in a library and put a million books before me, I'm going to be such a generalist.
It's going to be a very roulette lottery that you can find me that will know these special collections in literature.
And you'd like to know who's one of the finer writers and English pros in the last 90 years.
You know, I just have a lot of questions when I go in the library.
Sometimes I'm kind of off-center in reading, and I'd like to have a new writer, someone that would completely change my own eye.
So I left that library that day, and I walked down those long stairs, and I walked immediately across and got access to, I got a permit down at the library.
the desk to a helmet to go in the new library.
I walked in the new library and I was taken by the beauty and the immensity of the building.
But also I was taken back that here in this great rotunda, the beauty was there.
But yet what it did, it took up the same space as the long staircase in the old building, which was the problem with the old building.
It didn't have, what, enough shelf space.
The lineal prodigy of shelving was inadequate.
And so you build a new building.
Now what do you do?
You build a building with extra reserve stacks, don't you?
I hope they do.
If you're out of stack space now and you're pushing books out the corner and discarding them and really having a difficult time,
you be sure that the new building has what?
It should have 40% more stack space.
And a lot of that is reserved stacks.
Now, at the same time we're doing away with the literature and philosophy and religious department, we're creating a what?
A collection on homosexuals.
You know, we're going to have a department of homosexuals.
So I think that reading matter can go in literature, philosophy, and religion
easier than religion, fathers, and living can go into the homosexual department, understand?
I think it's the more important of the two, and it takes overriding precedence.
Although politically, now what they did is remarkable there.
They did the best job, I think, of anyone in the United States of raising public awareness and getting that bond issue through and raising their budget.
I don't think anyone in the United States has done a job equal to what they've done.
you know, in San Francisco.
You just have to.
You've got a lot of private money, too.
Yes, private money.
You just have to stand in awe of what they accomplished.
The friends and the director, and that was an absolutely incredible achievement.
So anyway, as I look at the new building, to me, now there's a book, and I wish I could call it up.
David Belch and I were talking about it, that was put out on the history of American libraries.
And they talked about if you want to destroy a library, hire an architect.
They say that?
Yeah, this is the gist of what they're saying, that architects will do more to destroy a library.
Who are the authors of the book for?
I had to talk to David Belch.
He was talking to me when we were on the last bus tour in San Francisco at the...
The Roxburgh Club.
And I forgot to jot it down, but I remember it vividly because he was talking about the building just like I was.
He and I both had that same impression.
Boy, I'd like to know that book.
Okay, I'll phone David and find out for you.
Because I'll tell you, I've been to the new French library where they hired this young new architect, 36 years old, who'd never done a library in his life.
And they spent close to 2 billion French pounds, not pounds, of francs,
And, you know, have you seen it with these huge towers and glass and the books are upstairs and the reading room is, I mean, it's a statement on French patrimony and all that, but what a half-assed scheme for a library.
My ego gets in my way.
This is only normal.
It's part of the human condition.
The question is trying to control my ego and keep it within balance.
And architects, there's another thing with architecture.
A friend of mine, well, my son is a builder, and he and I talk about this, and his best friend is an architect.
And we've talked with the architect friend of ours, and he said, well, one of the biggest problems is you run up the bill on a public building, you put more expensive doors in, and you just keep adding this, because your percentage then comes out better.
So it's a normal human thing, is the larger the contract, the better the percentage of that the architect makes.
Yeah, but I mean, if you were to have been told that
Here they were going to spend, what is it, $150 million on a new library.
And the day it opens, they don't have enough shelf space just to receive the existing collection.
It's already not sufficient to accommodate the existing collection.
No, this is the tragedy.
Essentially what it was, I think they were so caught up in raising the money, getting the bond issue through,
that they forgot really some of their fundamentals.
For example, they overspent a million dollars.
Well, one fundamental administration is that you have a comptroller, and that comptroller checks me to see that I don't overextend.
And if I put in a requisition for, you know, $100,000 worth of this, new stacks, he puts the requisition back on my desk and says,
Fund's not available.
That's it.
And so these basic principles of administration were basically set aside.
It's like closing the literature department.
These are very basic.
It's like on a football team.
You have that safety in the backfield on defense for what?
He is the one that's the safety.
He's the safety net who makes the tackle that you and I miss.
And it's essential that you have that comptroller.
He's essential to administration as the forecasting and planning is for the director to see in ahead.
And they more or less, I think they were so caught up in the massiveness of the enterprise that some of this went by the side.
And the same thing with the stack space.
I think they were enamored with the building and the architecture
was enamored with it, and they just didn't seem to check lineal footage.
And I wonder if they ever really had librarians in the loop.
That's what I wanted to.
I just don't know.
When I was out there, I talked to the director with Marjorie Stern, and I felt that he was just... You're talking about Dowling now, right?
Yeah, Dowling.
I felt, to me, the handwriting...
outside the building and inside the building, well, administratively, it's time to leave.
You know, and essentially, I went over to the new building, and it was on a neon sign, it's time for me to leave.
You know, there was a difference.
Inside, you could see the old building, you could see the writing.
There was a neon sign on the new building that said to leave.
I don't think Dallin ever got it.
You know, I don't think he got the message.
I don't think he...
He did such an excellent job of getting the issue through and getting the bond issue and getting the budget increased that he was so caught up in that he couldn't see this.
And I think that's normal.
I think as many administrators... I wonder how much background he has in books and libraries, though.
Well, he came from...
It doesn't have to go off the record.
Yeah, that's fine.
And I did an interview with him in his house, by the way.
What?
I did an interview with him in his apartment.
Uh-huh.
And, I mean, this is off the record, but he's got Reader's Digest condensed books there, you know?
Yeah, now this is what I'm saying.
It's just between you and me, but that does give you a sense of what we're talking about here.
Well, see, he had a Topeka, Kansas mind.
You understand?
And this was what I thought anyone that would cut the heart of a metropolitan library with his major department, he's really in Boulder, Colorado, where he came from.
Understand?
He really hasn't, his mind hasn't come up to that metropolitan area.
San Francisco is filled with people with the most wide, interesting, curious interests that you've ever known.
You know, this is not a lazy population out there.
They're very vital and alert and also always challenging and probing into this.
Well, I'll tell you, the outcry that developed
from the people out there, over the library and its holdings.
That was remarkable to see for me.
I mean, these people really fought like crazy to protect the intellectual integrity of the library.
And that's what I think this whole issue is about.
It almost sounded like an anti-intellectual attitude here.
It really was.
I mean, here was a question I asked, and I was never able to get a sufficient answer.
I mean, it is said that nobody knows because nobody kept any records and nobody really wants to know.
But they estimate that perhaps as many as 200,000 books were sent off to the landfill.
Okay.
I wouldn't doubt that at all.
You wouldn't doubt it?
Oh, I wouldn't doubt it.
Okay.
Well, then I said, well, why do we have to estimate?
Didn't anybody keep a record of the books that were deaccessioned?
And they shrugged.
No, I said, you're telling me.
I mean, this to me is, this is really, you know, it's one thing to say we don't want this book anymore.
Let's get rid of it.
It's quite another to say, don't you think it's worth knowing what books you had at a certain point of time in your history, what books were relevant to your readers, say, in the 1930s or the 40s or the 50s, books that were read then that are not read today?
At least a record of the person's, of the book's existence on this earth is not a bad thing.
piece of information to keep, wouldn't you think?
All you had to do is throw one card of the seven cards in a file.
You know, your main entry, and you had it.
In other words, you didn't have to go create it.
But don't you think that's a worthwhile record to keep?
Oh, it is a worthwhile record.
And the main thing is, you're getting back, Nick, to this basics that I'm talking about.
These basic things.
You've got to have a comptroller.
You've got to have your major departments.
You've got to see the library and its literature as a whole.
You've got to have concern for book collections and also the reader that reads other than what you read.
In other words, you may be in a completely field of different interest in reading than what I am.
But your interest in reading is as valid as important as mine.
And I have to understand this and reflect it in a library's collection.
like the New York Public Library, they understand this and know it.
And you have to assume the responsibility if you're going to have a metropolitan library, a metropolitan center, then you need a metropolitan library.
They go hand in hand.
You can't put a little Mickey Mouse library in the center of a metropolitan area and expect it to work.
We're having the same problems in Austin.
All the little French libraries, there's no way you can get a book out of them.
They're just for children's libraries and for a few of the ladies who are reading popular romance and popular literature.
Now, I asked the current librarian, a nice woman, by the way, highly respected, seems like Gina Menoudry, you know who she is?
Uh-huh.
And I said, do you see yourself functioning as a research librarian?
She said, no.
No.
She's from Berkeley.
Yeah.
You know, and see, that's the feeling I'd have in Berkeley, too.
Berkeley and San Francisco are two different cities.
Pete and San Francisco are two different cities.
You know, maybe I'm a little too strong that way.
I could be wrong.
I'm not saying that I'm right.
That's my feeling and my philosophy from knowing the people in San Francisco, their background, their interest, and my own interest as a reader.
Uh,
See, what was I was wanting?
Oh, from the University of Texas.
Odostoyevsky's wife wrote a wonderful book about him, and I wanted to read that book, and my wife wanted to read it.
Now, this is an esoteric book.
I just came across it.
Oh, I came across it from reading B.S.
Pritchett.
You know, he has a marvelous collection of essays.
I think I have it here someplace.
You read his essay on Mark Twain?
I mean, Todd is rich.
It's the best essay on Mark Twain.
Okay, good.
I've got his essays and his short stories here, too.
And you read that on Mark Twain and how he dissipated his life, this great talent, and his only great work came out of there, you know, was Huckleberry Finn.
And the rest of his life he just prostituted because he was so hungry for money.
But anyway, in Pritchett's, he was talking about Dostoevsky and he was talking about this book.
So I got on the Internet and tried to pick it up.
I got access to the UT catalog, and they didn't have it.
And I phoned Harold Billings up, the director, and I said, Come on, Harold, what's wrong with you guys down there?
I want to get the copy of this book.
He said, Well, Bill, we'll search it out and get it.
And they searched it out, and I think it's now in, and it's going through catalog.
But here's a reader who comes across this book, and I'd like to read.
He married this young girl, lady, and she turned out to be an inspiration to him.
And she took notes and took a Kepa diary of his life.
And then she wrote this marvelous book.
No kidding.
Pritchett said about his life and his way of writing and his way of meeting people.
Sounds fascinating.
It sounds fascinating.
I haven't read the book yet.
But to me, I want to read the book.
And I don't see any reason why a large metropolitan library shouldn't have that book for me.
I like to go back and explore all these other writers.
Even if I've read them, I like to read them again.
It's like Ternia's love story.
He wrote one of the great
romance novel, love stories of all time.
But anyway, maybe I'm more university mind-oriented.
I could easily be wrong.
I think you have to have both.
You meet the public's demand for the popular, but you have in reserve in this central core library this reference type of collection.
And they've always had it in San Francisco.
There's nothing new.
You know, what they did wrong there, they would lose so many books through theft, they wouldn't replace them, and they didn't know what they had on their shelves.
But in terms of a collection, they had some remarkable books in that library, you know, before I got there.
You know, it wasn't a dead collection by any means.
The tragedy, what they did...
They had this policy.
They let the bookbinder come in and select off the shelf the books to be bound, and so he destroyed a lot of books.
You know, he put Buckram binding over a... When was this?
Oh, this was in the... I'd say in the 40s, 50s.
Oh, a long time ago.
Yeah, 40s and 50s, and before I got there.
And then what I did, I... I...
I drafted new specifications for binding, and it was awarded to another binder outside the city.
And then Futernik owned the bindery, and he came down to, he said on the phone, he said, well, I'm going to come down and show you how we operate in San Francisco.
So he came down before the board, and the front page article came out the next day where he admitted that he had overcharged
overbilled the library, and also he didn't use the binding boards that were specified in the specifications and all the other things he didn't do.
So I didn't hear from him anymore.
I heard from his lawyer he was going to sue me.
I had a tape of the meeting, and I never heard about the suit.
But anyway, it was that type of thing that they would, well, for example, magazines.
You'd send Futernik, they'd send Futernik the magazines to be bound.
And so they'd come back XXX and they'd be $75, $150 a copy device.
And I said, well, why is this?
He said, well, there were terrible conditions and this and that.
So then I had my administrative assistant go down and set up 12 volumes and collate every page.
And we sent them into the bindery.
And they came back with the same charges.
And at the end of the year, that same 12, the budget came back to the exact penny as to what the total budget was for binding.
That's amazing.
And that type of thing began.
You know, it was really a payoff to Futernik that he contributed to the local policy.
So why don't we go, can you just tell me briefly how you decided to go into being a librarian?
Oh, I think one thing.
I think you can't separate a person's... I think when I had experienced an institutional life, I left that.
Now, my wife says that, you know, I could go to hell in five days to find good weather.
But out of that institutional life, it marked me, too.
I had periods of loneliness, and I often turned to reading.
And then when I was in Trumride, Oklahoma, Katie Shikram, who was a next-door neighbor of mine, a Jewish lady, who was a teacher, and she taught, took me in hand, took me to the library, got my library card, and I read out of her library, and later she was a substitute English teacher in high school, and she led me through so much literature.
And she inspired me with this idea that books are just vitally important.
They're not something that you just read, you know, for relaxation or for escape.
That they were vital for your future and to enlarge your own vision of life that later on it will become so much, they're such friends that later they become so important to you.
And she put that, then when I went to
OU, I had this course in bibliography under Mary Hayes Marable, who was voted one of the outstanding teachers in Oklahoma.
She was one of the women of the year in Oklahoma.
And she's the one that said, well, Bill, you shouldn't go in law.
And all of us lawyers were taking this pre-course in bibliography, you know, in libraries.
And she was the head of the library science department there.
And she's the one that said, well, Bill, you should go to Illinois and get your master's and go into library administration.
She said, that's just a wide open field.
It's just a field that you would enjoy and you'd be very good at.
So I took her advance.
So I had a wife and two children.
I graduated from OU, left there, arrived at Champaign-Urbana with $17 in her pocket.
And I had a fellowship there in the reference department.
My wife went to work waiting tables.
And we went through, you know, but I think, you know, this one quotation that's on page 172, 173 of the history of San Francisco Library is one that I had Herman Thoth do a calligraphy for the library.
It's Theo Varley, and I've never found now where I found this quotation.
It says, an education through books is a companion which no misforced can depress.
And I think that's a very, very cogent and with great clarity of what I feel about books.
And I still feel that way.
I haven't changed my feeling there.
And Herman Zoff, the great calligrapher, who will one day go down in the history, much larger than Baskerville or Caslon, did that in 1966.
I had him do a commission for the San Francisco Public Library, that quotation.
That's great.
And that's illustrated on those pages.
Did you know Tilly Olson when you were out there?
Yes, uh-huh.
I interviewed Tilly for this book.
She's a very interesting woman.
She's a very interesting writer, very good.
Yeah, and she's fascinating.
Of course, she is a reader and totally self-educated by her own reading.
Yeah.
are very interested in people who are shaped by their reading.
Well, like Pritchett, he learned how to write through reading.
Who is this?
V.S.
Pritchett.
Is that right?
The English.
Oh, yeah.
That's how he went back and studied particularly all the Russian writers.
And the English novelist, he was... He says that?
Oh, yes.
In his essays?
Let's see.
How did I come back to that?
I think somewhere in one of his introductions he talks about this, and I don't know which one, but I came away with that very strong impression, you know, that here's a writer who went back.
He didn't go to college, you know.
That's one I have to have then.
He was self-educated, you know.
So to speak, he went to, you know, what we'd call high school.
Right.
But he went on and essentially...
That was the limit of his education.
That's great.
I'm going to check it out.
Well, you go back and read his essays, and his essays now give an analysis of the writing of, oh, how do you pronounce the Russian writer?
Turgenev?
Turgenev.
So it looks like Turgenev.
Yeah, Turgenev.
Just like T-U-R, then G-A-I-N, and then Y-E-F-F, Turgenev.
Turgenev.
I have a problem with pronunciation.
I have kind of a little stutter for my...
I used to stutter when I was in those homes.
Boy, I wouldn't know it.
And so I still have that.
Well, it sounds to me like you've pretty well controlled it, really.
Well, I've controlled it fairly well, you know, fairly well.
But you read his essay on Germany, now you understand where he's coming from, where his mentor is.
And there it is.
You know, that was one of his, probably his strongest mentor.
and Tolstoy probably to some degree, but I don't think as strong as
I can't tell you how this information is just as interesting, if not even more interesting to me, than the San Francisco Public Library story.
Oh, it is.
I've got to tell you, because that story, after I've been into it too much, I think I've got to say that people have to settle down a little bit out there.
They've got to relax.
Well, I think they will.
You know, I mean, you have to just kind of sit back and say, look, we've got this building.
We're not going to tear it down.
No.
No, what you do is go in there and improvise.
That's right, yeah.
And you take certain departments and consolidate.
That's right.
And it's like in the old building, see.
The old building, when I went there, didn't have a subject department.
It just had one reference department.
Well, I went in there and we created a subject department library in there with hardly any increase in budget.
I brought in one fine staff member for one department, took another staff member and put her in charge of another.
And we created a metropolitan reference library there within a matter of six months, you know.
And the same way at that building that they have now, you have to go in there and improvise and...